---
id: 101
title: "Is Unique"
date: 2020-10-04T15:44:43+00:00
author: admin
layout: single
comments_id: 101
categories:
  - Data Structures and Algorithms
  - Cracking The Coding Interview
tags:
  - Arrays and Strings
---

Implement an algorithm to determine if a string has all unique characters. What if you can not use additional data structures?

#### Hints

- Try a hash table.
- Could a bit vector be useful?
- Can you solve it in O(N log N) time? What might a solution like that look like?

#### Solution


One solution is to create an array of boolean values, where the flag at index i indicates whether character
i in the alphabet is contained in the string. The second time you see this character you can immediately
return false. 

> It's okay to assume 256 characters. This would be the case in extended ASCII. You should
clarify your assumptions with your interviewer.

{% highlight java %}
public static boolean isUniqueChars(String str) {
  if (str.length() > 128) {
    return false;
  }
  boolean[] char_set = new boolean[128];
  for (int i = 0; i < str.length(); i++) {
    int val = str.charAt(i);
    if (char_set[val]) return false;
    char_set[val] = true;
  }
  return true;
}
{% endhighlight %}

n is the length of the string
The time complexity for this code is O(n)


We can reduce our space usage by a factor of eight by using a bit vector. We will assume, in the below code,
that the string only uses the lowercase letters a through z.

{% highlight java %}
public static boolean isUniqueChars(String str) {
  if (str.length() > 26) { // Only 26 characters
    return false;
  }
  int checker = 0;
  for (int i = 0; i < str.length(); i++) {
    int val = str.charAt(i) - 'a';
    if ((checker & (1 << val)) > 0) return false;
    checker |= (1 << val);
  }
  return true;
}
{% endhighlight %}

If we can't use additional data structures, we can do the following: 

1. Compare every character of the string to every other character of the string. This will take O( n2) time
and 0 (1) space.
2. If we are allowed to modify the input string, we could sort the string in O( n log( n» time and then
linearly check the string for neighboring characters that are identical. Careful, though: many sorting
algorithms take up extra space. 